1.  What is Spark?
Apache Spark is a distributed data processing engine that uses DAG-based execution, in-memory computation, and parallel processing to efficiently handle large-scale data workloads.
or
Spark is a super-fast cluster computing technology. It is a distributed data processing engine that can be used to solve a variety of complex problems and perform highly complex computations

2. What are the Feature of spark?
  a.	Speed          -->   Spark runs up to 100 times faster than Hadoop MapReduce for large-scale data processing. It is also able to achieve this speed through controlled partitioning.
  b.	Powerful Caching   -->   Simple programming layer provides powerful caching and disk persistence capabilities.
  c.    Deployment     -->   It can be deployed through Mesos, Hadoop via YARN, or Spark’s own cluster manager.
  d.    Real-Time      -->   It offers Real-time computation & low latency because of in-memory computation.
  e.    Polyglot     -->    Spark provides high-level APIs in Java, Scala, Python, and R. Spark code can be written in any of these four languages. It also provides a shell in Scala and Python.

3. Name the components in the Spark ecosystem ? 
 The components in the Spark ecosystem are: 
    ⇒ Spark Streaming – It is responsible for processing the real-time streaming data.
    ⇒ GraphX – It implements graphs and parallel computations on the graphs.
    ⇒ Spark SQL – It is responsible for integrating Spark’s functional programming API with relational database processing. 
    ⇒ MLib – This is the library used for machine learning.
    ⇒ Spark Core – It is a distributed execution engine that can perform large-scale parallel and distributed data processing.

4. what is RDD?
 Resilient Distributed Dataset   stands for 

	Resilient: It’s fault-tolerant and can build data in case of a any node failure

	Distributed: The data is distributed among multiple nodes in a cluster

	Dataset: Data is partitioned based on values

 RDD is immutable, meaning that it cannot be modified once created, but it can be transformed at any time. Every Dataset in RDD is divided into multiple logical partitions, and this distribution is done by Spark.
 An RDD can be created from existing data in your program or from external storage like HDFS/ ADLS. It supports two types of operations: transformations and actions

5. what is Transformations?
  RDD transformations are lazy operations that create a new RDD from an existing one, such as map and filter.


6. What are Narrow and Wide Transformations?
  Narrow transformation: A transformation where each input partition is used to create only one output partition
    •	Data stays within one partition (no shuffle)
    •	Faster execution
 Examples:
    •	map() → apply function to each element
    •	filter() → select some elements
    •	flatMap() → flatten data

 Wide transformation: A transformation where data from multiple partitions is shuffled and combined to create new partitions
     •	Data moves across partitions (shuffle happens)
    •	More expensive
Examples:
    •	groupByKey()
    •	reduceByKey()
    •	join()
    •	distinct()



7. what is Actions ?
  Actions are applied on an RDD, which instructs Spark to apply computation and sent the result to the driver
   --------------------------------------
     Action         |  Meaning
  ---------------------------------------
    Collect()       | Returns all data to driver
    Count()         | Counts no of elements

8. What is a Lineage Graph ?
 A Lineage Graph (also known as the RDD Operator Graph) is a record of all the parent RDDs used to create a child RDD. Since RDDs are immutable, Spark doesn't change data; it creates new RDDs. If a node fails and a partition of data is lost, Spark looks at the lineage graph to see exactly which transformations were applied to the original data source and re-runs them to recover the lost partition.



3. What are the Spark Terminologies?
Spark Context
Spark Shell
Spark Application
Job
Stage
Task


What are the different cluster managers in Spark? 
Ans: There are three different cluster managers in Spark – YARN, Spache Mesos, and standalone deployments. 

What is Shuffling?
Ans: Shuffling is the redistribution of data across partitions. Data transfer across stages happens during shuffling. It may lead to data movement across the Java Virtual Machines processes. Data redistribution between executors on separate machines is also called shuffling. 


How do you achieve fault tolerance in Spark?

Spark achieves fault tolerance through two main methods:

Lineage: As mentioned, Spark can recompute lost partitions using the lineage graph.
Checkpointing: For applications with very long or complex lineages (like streaming or iterative ML), Spark can save the RDD's state to a reliable storage system (like S3 or HDFS). This "cuts" the lineage, so if a failure occurs, Spark only has to recompute from the last checkpoint.



Apache Spark Interview Questions and Answers

1. What is Apache Spark?

Answer: Apache Spark is an open-source distributed data processing framework designed for large-scale data processing. It provides in-memory computation, making it much faster than traditional Hadoop MapReduce for many workloads.


---

2. What are the main components of Spark?

Answer:

Spark Core – Basic execution engine.

Spark SQL – Structured data processing.

Spark Streaming / Structured Streaming – Real-time data processing.

MLlib – Machine learning library.

GraphX – Graph processing.



---

3. What is an RDD?

Answer: RDD (Resilient Distributed Dataset) is Spark's fundamental distributed collection of data. It is:

Immutable

Distributed across nodes

Fault-tolerant through lineage


Example:

rdd = spark.sparkContext.parallelize([1,2,3,4])


---

4. What is the difference between RDD, DataFrame, and Dataset?

Feature	RDD	DataFrame	Dataset

Type Safety	Yes	No	Yes
Optimization	No	Catalyst	Catalyst
Performance	Lower	Higher	Higher
Language Support	All	All	Scala/Java


Answer: DataFrames are generally preferred because Spark can optimize execution using the Catalyst Optimizer.


---

5. What are Transformations and Actions?

Transformations

Create a new dataset.

Lazy execution.


Examples:

map()
filter()
groupBy()

Actions

Trigger execution.


Examples:

count()
collect()
show()
save()


---

6. What is Lazy Evaluation?

Answer: Spark does not execute transformations immediately. It builds a DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) and executes only when an action is called.

Example:

df.filter(df.age > 30)

No execution occurs until:

df.count()


---

7. What is a DAG in Spark?

Answer: DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) represents the sequence of transformations. Spark's DAG Scheduler divides jobs into stages and tasks for efficient execution.


---

8. What is Lineage?

Answer: Lineage tracks all transformations applied to an RDD/DataFrame.

Example:

rdd1 -> map -> filter -> reduce

If data is lost, Spark rebuilds it using lineage information.


---

9. Difference between cache() and persist()?

cache()	persist()

Stores in memory	Stores in memory/disk
Default storage level	Custom storage levels


Example:

df.cache()
df.persist()


---

10. What is Shuffling?

Answer: Shuffling is data movement across partitions/nodes.

Examples:

groupBy()
join()
distinct()

Shuffling is expensive because it involves:

Disk I/O

Network I/O

Serialization



---

11. Difference between groupByKey() and reduceByKey()?

groupByKey()

Transfers all values over network.

High memory consumption.


reduceByKey()

Performs local aggregation first.

Better performance.


Example:

rdd.reduceByKey(lambda x,y:x+y)

Preferred: reduceByKey()


---

12. What is a Broadcast Variable?

Answer: Broadcast variables distribute a read-only copy of data to all executors.

Example:

broadcastVar = spark.sparkContext.broadcast(lookup_dict)

Used to optimize joins with small lookup tables.


---

13. What are Accumulators?

Answer: Variables used for counters and aggregations.

Example:

acc = spark.sparkContext.accumulator(0)

Used for:

Error counts

Record counts

Monitoring



---

14. What is Catalyst Optimizer?

Answer: Catalyst is Spark SQL's query optimization framework.

It performs:

Predicate pushdown

Constant folding

Join reordering

Column pruning


Result: Faster query execution.


---

15. What is Tungsten?

Answer: Tungsten improves Spark performance through:

Better memory management

CPU optimization

Binary processing

Whole-stage code generation



---

16. Difference between repartition() and coalesce()?

repartition()	coalesce()

Increase/decrease partitions	Mainly decrease
Causes shuffle	Minimal shuffle
Expensive	Faster


Example:

df.repartition(100)
df.coalesce(10)


---

17. What is Data Skew?

Answer: Data skew occurs when some partitions contain significantly more data than others.

Problem:

Some executors finish quickly.

One executor takes much longer.


Solutions:

Salting

Broadcast joins

Repartitioning

AQE (Adaptive Query Execution)



---

18. What is a Broadcast Join?

Answer: When one table is small, Spark broadcasts it to all executors.

Example:

from pyspark.sql.functions import broadcast

df1.join(broadcast(df2), "id")

Benefits:

No shuffle

Faster joins



---

19. What is Adaptive Query Execution (AQE)?

Answer: AQE dynamically optimizes query execution at runtime.

Features:

Dynamic join strategy selection

Skew handling

Partition coalescing


Enable:

spark.conf.set("spark.sql.adaptive.enabled", "true")


---

20. How do you optimize Spark jobs?

Answer:

1. Use DataFrames instead of RDDs.


2. Cache reused datasets.


3. Use broadcast joins.


4. Avoid unnecessary shuffles.


5. Use partition pruning.


6. Use Parquet format.


7. Tune executor memory and cores.


8. Enable AQE.




---

21. What causes OutOfMemory (OOM) errors?

Answer: Common reasons:

Large collect()

Data skew

Insufficient executor memory

Large shuffles

Too many cached datasets


Solutions:

Increase executor memory

Avoid collect()

Use broadcast joins

Repartition data



---

22. What is Predicate Pushdown?

Answer: Spark pushes filter conditions to the data source.

Example:

df.filter("country='India'")

Only matching rows are read from storage.

Benefits:

Less I/O

Faster execution



---

23. Why is Parquet preferred in Spark?

Answer: Parquet is:

Columnar format

Compressed

Supports predicate pushdown

Supports column pruning


Result: Better performance and lower storage.


---

24. Explain Spark Job → Stage → Task.

Answer:

Job

Triggered by an action.


Stage

Group of transformations.


Task

Smallest unit executed on a partition.


Example:

Action
  ↓
Job
  ↓
Stages
  ↓
Tasks


---

25. Scenario: Spark job is slow. How will you troubleshoot?

Answer:

1. Check Spark UI.


2. Identify shuffle-heavy stages.


3. Check data skew.


4. Verify partition count.


5. Check executor memory usage.


6. Examine joins.


7. Enable AQE.


8. Use broadcast joins where possible.


9. Review DAG execution plan:



df.explain(True)

Interview Tip

A very common question is:

"Why are DataFrames faster than RDDs?"

Answer:

Catalyst Optimizer optimizes queries.

Tungsten improves memory usage.

Whole-stage code generation reduces CPU overhead.

Columnar processing reduces I/O.

